Support for arrays as kernel parameters. (#1841)
intel/llvm: sycl/doc/Array_Kernel_Parameters.md

<h2>Array Parameters of SYCL Kernels</h2>

<h3>Introduction</h3>

> This document describes the changes to support passing arrays to SYCL kernels 

Reviewer: changes to what? Please add

Reviewer: This document not only describes arrays of parameters, but mechanisms behind kernel parameter generation in general. So I suggest to rename the document to reflect that. Arrays is just one of the topics covered here.

Would be great to add a link from CompilerAndRuntimeDesign.md to this document,

and special treatment of Accessor arrays.
The following cases are handled:

1. arrays of standard-layout type as top-level arguments

> 2. arrays of Accessors as top-level arguments

Reviewer: +1 Accessors -> accessors everwhere

�kernel caller� and a �kernel callee�.
The callee is a clone of the SYCL kernel object.
The caller is generated in the form of an OpenCL kernel function.
It receives the lambda capture object in pieces, assembles the pieces
into the original lambda capture object and then calls the callee:

```C++
spir_kernel void caller(
    __global int* AccData, // arg1 of Accessor init function
    range<1> AccR1,        // arg2 of Accessor init function
    range<1> AccR2,        // arg3 of Accessor init function
    id<1> I,               // arg4 of Accessor init function
    int i,
    struct S s
)
{
    // Local capture object
    struct Capture local;

    // Reassemble capture object from parts
    local.i = i;
    local.s = s;
    // Call accessor�s init function
    Accessor::init(&local.outAcc, AccData, AccR1, AccR2, I);

    // Call the kernel body
    callee(&local, id<1> wi);
}

spir_func void callee(struct Capture* this, id<1> wi)
{
}
```

As may be observed from the example above, standard-layout lambda capture
components are passed by value to the device as separate parameters.
This includes scalars, pointers, and standard-layout structs.

> Certain SYCL struct types that are not standard-layout,

Reviewer: This kind of implies that they are treated specially because they are non-standard layout, which is wrong impression.

Author: OK, so the reason for calling the init function on the device is that the host and device representations are different?

Reviewer: Main reason is because they can't be copied verbatim and used on the device. Can't be copied because:
- some of the fields need translation (e.g. pointer in the accessor is present in both views, but needs translation)
- representation is different
- layout may be different due to ABI differences between host and deivce (not unique to "special" types).

So there can exist special types which have the same representation, but still can't copy because of translation.

> Certain SYCL struct types that are not standard-layout,
> such as Accessors and Samplers, are treated specially.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Objects of certain SYCL classes - such as `accessor` and `sampler` - require translation of
some of their fields when passed from host to the kernel. For example, pointer field within
an accessor must be translated to an OpenCL or L0 memory object before it can be passed
as kernel parameter.
```

> The arguments to their init functions are passed as separate parameters
> and used within the kernel caller function to initialize Accessors/Samplers
> on the device by calling their init functions using the received arguments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They also have different layout on the host and device - some fields are missing, some
fields are replaced in the "device view" of such object. Such classes provide device-only
`init` functions which are used to re-assemble device view of the objects from incoming
kernel parameters.
```

Author: OK, edited.

There is one other aspect of code generation. An �integration header�
is generated for use during host compilation.
This header file contains entries for each kernel.
Among the items it defines is a table of sizes and offsets of the
kernel parameters.
For the source example above the integration header contains the
following snippet:

```C++
// array representing signatures of all kernels defined in the
// corresponding source
static constexpr
const kernel_param_desc_t kernel_signatures[] = {
  //--- _ZTSZZ4mainENKUlRN2cl4sycl7handlerEE19->18clES2_E6Worker
  { kernel_param_kind_t::kind_accessor, 4062, 0 },
  { kernel_param_kind_t::kind_std_layout, 4, 32 },
  { kernel_param_kind_t::kind_std_layout, 4, 36 },
};
```

Each entry in the kernel_signatures table contains three values:
1) an encoding of the type of capture object member
2) a field that encodes additional properties, and
3) an offset within a block of memory where the value of that

> 4) kernel argument is placed.

Reviewer: Please add a reference to this section from the integration header section in https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/CompilerAndRuntimeDesign.md

The previous sections described how kernel arguments are handled today.
The next three sections describe support for arrays.

<h3>Fix 1: Kernel Arguments that are Standard-Layout Arrays</h3>

As described earlier, each variable captured by a lambda that comprises a

> SYCL kernel becomes a parameter of the kernel caller function.

Reviewer: Not quite clear what is "kernel caller function". Should it be introduced in some "terminology" section? (See also below).
Maybe use "kernel" for "kernel caller function" (as the kernel is actually the entry point) and "kernel body function" for "kernel" (as it is not really the kernel, but its body :-) )

For arrays, simply allowing them through would result in a
function parameter of array type. This is not supported in C++.
Therefore, the array needing capture is wrapped in a struct for
the purposes of passing to the device. Once received on the device

> within its wrapper, the array is copied into the local capture object.

Reviewer: it would be good to introduce the terminology beforehands, otherwise will be really hard to comprehend for unaware readers. E.g. What is local capture object, kernel, lambda, lambda object,...

All references to the array within the kernel body are directed to
the non-wrapped array which is a member of the local capture object.

> 

Reviewer: maybe worth mentioning that updates are made to the captured copy only

<h4>Source code fragment:</h4>

```C++
  int array[100];
  auto outBuf = buffer<int, 1>(&output[0], num_items);

  myQueue.submit([&](handler &cgh) {
    auto outAcc = outBuf.get_access<access::mode::write>(cgh);
    cgh.parallel_for<class Worker>(num_items, [=](cl::sycl::id<1> index) {
      outAcc[index] = array[index.get(0)];
    });
  });
```

<h4>Integration header produced:</h4>

```C++
static constexpr
const kernel_param_desc_t kernel_signatures[] = {
  //--- _ZTSZZ4mainENKUlRN2cl4sycl7handlerEE16->18clES2_E6Worker
  { kernel_param_kind_t::kind_accessor, 4062, 0 },
  { kernel_param_kind_t::kind_std_layout, 400, 32 },
};
```

<h4>The changes to device code made to support this extension, in pseudo-code:</h4>

> 

Reviewer: These changes are made by the device compiler, right? Please add this not, otherwise not quite clear.
Also 'changes' -> 'transformations'?

```C++
struct Capture {
    Accessor outAcc;
    int array[100];
    () {
        // Body
    }
}

struct wrapper {
    int array[100];
};
spir_kernel void caller(
    __global int* AccData, // arg1 of Accessor init function
    range<1> AccR1,        // arg2 of Accessor init function
    range<1> AccR2,        // arg3 of Accessor init function
    id<1> I,               // arg4 of Accessor init function
    struct wrapper w_s     // Pass the array wrapped in a struct
)
{
    // Local capture object
    struct Capture local;

    // Reassemble capture object from parts
    // Initialize array using existing clang Initialization mechanisms
    local.array = w_s; 
    // Call accessor�s init function
    Accessor::init(&local.outAcc, AccData, AccR1, AccR2, I);

    callee(&local, id<1> wi);
}
```

The sharp-eyed reviewer of `SemaSYCL.cpp` will notice that the array

> is actually double-wrapped in structs. This was done simply to preserve

Reviewer 2: I think we don't do it anymore.

Author: This doc is obsolete and has been removed. New doc KernelParameterPassing.md has been added.

> is actually double-wrapped in structs. This was done simply to preserve
> the interface to an existing function (`CreateAndAddPrmDsc`) which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is actually double-wrapped in structs. This was done to process arrays uniformly with
other kinds of parameters via the existing function (`CreateAndAddPrmDsc`) which
```

processes each kernel caller parameter as a capture object member. 
The object being added to a list in `CreateAndAddPrmDsc` is `Fld`,
which is expected to be a field of some struct. So a wrapped struct
cannot be passed to this function. A double-wrapped struct is needed
as shown below. This does not affect the generated code.

```C++
struct {
  struct {
    int array[100];
  }
}
```

> This could be changed but it would mean changes to the `CreateAndAddPrmDsc`
> implementation, to all its callers and to the place where the list created
> by it is processed.
> By wrapping the array twice, the inner, single-wrapped array appears as a
> member of a struct and meets the requirements of the existing code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Single level of wrapping might look more elegant, but it would reduce potential for code reuse
and complicate the implementation w/o giving any benefits.
```

Reviewer: this variant might be simpler

  { kernel_param_kind_t::kind_accessor, 4062, 64 },
};
```

<h4>Device code generated in pseudo-code form:</h4>

```C++
struct Capture {
    Accessor outAcc; 
    Accessor inAcc[2];
    () {
        // Body
    }
}

spir_kernel void caller(
    __global int* outAccData,    // args of OutAcc
    range<1> outAccR1,
    range<1> outAccR2,
    id<1> outI, 
    __global int* inAccData_0,   // args of inAcc[0]
    range<1> inAccR1_0,
    range<1> inAccR2_0,
    id<1> inI_0,
    __global int* inAccData_1,   // args of inAcc[1]
    range<1> inAccR1_1,
    range<1> inAccR2_1,
    id<1> inI_1,
)
{
    // Local capture object
    struct Capture local;

    // Reassemble capture object from parts 
    // Call outAcc accessor�s init function
    Accessor::init(&local.outAcc, outAccData, outAccR1, outAccR2, outI); 

    // Call inAcc[0] accessor�s init function
    Accessor::init(&local.inAcc[0], inAccData_0, inAccR1_0, inAccR2_0, inI_0);

    // Call inAcc[1] accessor�s init function
    Accessor::init(&local.inAcc[1], inAccData_1, inAccR1_1, inAccR2_1, inI_1);

    callee(&local, id<1> wi);
}
```

<h3>Fix 3: Accessor Arrays within Structs</h3>

> *Individual* Accessors within structs were already supported.

Reviewer: I think this document should not mention what "is" supported as opposed to what "was" supported, as readers will see the end state which does not distinguish is/was

Author: OK.

     outAcc[index] = s.m + s.inAcc[0][index] + s.inAcc[1][index];
   });
});
```

<h4>Integration header:</h4>

```C++
static constexpr
const kernel_param_desc_t kernel_signatures[] = {
  //--- _ZTSZZ4mainENKUlRN2cl4sycl7handlerEE20->18clES2_E6Worker
  { kernel_param_kind_t::kind_accessor, 4062, 0 },
  { kernel_param_kind_t::kind_std_layout, 72, 32 },
  { kernel_param_kind_t::kind_accessor, 4062, 40 },
  { kernel_param_kind_t::kind_accessor, 4062, 72 },

};
```

<h4>Device code generated in pseudo-code form:</h4>

```C++
struct Capture {
    Accessor outAcc;
    struct S s;
    () {
        // Body
    }
}

spir_kernel void caller(
    __global int* outAccData,  // args of OutAcc
    range<1> outAccR1,
    range<1> outAccR2,
    id<1> outI,
    struct S s,                // the struct S
    __global int* inAccData_0, // args of s.inAcc[0]
    range<1> inAccR1_0,
    range<1> inAccR2_0,
    id<1> inI_0,
    __global int* inAccData_1, // args of s.inAcc[1]
    range<1> inAccR1_1,
    range<1> inAccR2_1,
    id<1> inI_1,
)
{
    // Local capture object
    struct Capture local;

    // Reassemble capture object from parts
    // Copy struct argument contents to local copy

>     // Accessor array will be initialized by calling init functions

Reviewer: Sounds like all three is done by the single line below (not the intent, right?) Maybe some grouping using 1) 2)...

Author: OK.
